PEP TBD: A rolling release cadence for CPython (#4)
ncoghlan/peps: pep-9999.rst

PEP: 9999
Title: A rolling feature release stream for CPython
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Steve Dower <steve.dower@python.org>, Nick Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-602-annual-release-cycle-for-python/2296
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Sep-2019
Python-Version: 3.9

Abstract
========

Rather than proposing a change to CPython's release cadence (as PEP 602 does),
or a change to CPython's policy for when new features can be added to a release
series (as PEP 598 does), this PEP proposes that we instead amend CPython's
pre-release management process as follows:

> * feature freeze, ABI freeze, bytecode format freeze, and maintenance branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Feature freeze, ABI freeze, bytecode format freeze, and maintenance branch
```

  creation all correspond with the first release candidate for an X.Y.0 release

> * the X.Y.0 release candidate period is extended from 3 weeks to 2 months

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The X.Y.0 release candidate period is extended from 3 weeks to 2 months
```

> * beta releases occur every other month whenever there is no X.Y.0 release in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Beta releases occur every other month whenever there is no X.Y.0 release in
```

  the release candidate phase

> * during the beta release period, all newly added interfaces are considered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* During the beta release period, all newly added interfaces are considered
```

  provisional, and each new release may introduce new deprecation warnings
  (or escalate previous deprecation warnings to errors)

> * routine alpha releases are removed from the process (release managers may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Routine alpha releases are removed from the process (release managers may
```

>   still choose to publish them if they feel they are appropriate)

Reviewer: Potentially ambigious double usage of "they".
```suggestion
  still choose to publish them if they feel the releases are appropriate)
```

As part of this change, the current "not for production use" guidance given for

> beta releases would be amended to say "suitable for production use only in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
beta releases would be amended to state "suitable for production use only in
```

environments with sufficiently robust compatibility testing and operational
monitoring capabilities".

> This PEP also proposes that the frequency of X.Y.0 releases be adjusted to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP also proposes that the frequency of X.Y.0 releases will be adjusted to
```

Author: Leaving the "will" out reads better to me in this case.

> target publishing a new release series in August of odd-numbered years

Reviewer: ```suggestion
target publishing a new release series in each August of odd-numbered years
```

Author: ```suggestion
target publishing a new release series in August of each odd-numbered year
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
begin each series in August every two years.
```

Even simpler, and clear enough for an abstract. I don't think there's value in specifying which year it starts in here.

Author: I've adopted a variant of this that still mentions 2021.

(2021, 2023, etc).

Background
==========

The current CPython pre-release and release management processes were developed
in an era where automated continuous integration and operational monitoring
systems were still relatively immature. Since that time, many organisations
have adopted deployment models that allow them to incorporate new CPython

> feature releases without substantially more risk than they incur for any other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature releases without adding substantially more risk than they incur for any other
```

code change.

> In light of that change in the wider environment, PEP 602 has proposed reducing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In light of those changes in the wider environment, PEP 602 has proposed reducing
```

the feature delivery latency for the Python standard library and CPython
reference interpreter by increasing the frequency of CPython feature releases

> from every 18-24 months to instead occur every 12 months.

Reviewer: I think this section could be split into two sentences, it seems to run on a bit. 
```
In light of those changes in the wider environment, PEP 602 has proposed reducing
the feature delivery latency for the Python standard library and CPython
reference interpreter. This would be accomplished by increasing the frequency of CPython feature releases
from every 18-24 months to instead occur every 12 months.
```

Note: I didn't include the word wrapping in the above suggestion.

Unfortunately, for many organisations, the cost of adopting a new Python release
doesn't automatically scale down with a reduced number of changes in the release,

> as the primary costs aren't associated with resolving any discovered issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as the primary costs aren't associated with resolving any discovered issues;
```

the primary costs are associated with the *search* for issues. This search may
involve manual testing of software systems, human review of written materials,
and other activities where the time required scales with the size of the
existing system, rather than the number of changes between the versions of
Python.

> PEP 598 was an initial attempt by one of the authors of this PEP to propose

Reviewer: Do the PEP reST files support Sphinx roles? If so, it might be helpful to provide an inline link to the other PEPs where appropriate.

```suggestion
:pep:`598` was an initial attempt by one of the authors of this PEP to propose
```

Author: No Sphinx roles (yet), but text of the form "PEP NNN" gets converted to a link automatically.

an alternative scheme to reduce feature delivery latency by adopting a
semantic versioning style policy that allowed for the incremental delivery of

> backwards compatible features within a release series until that series

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backwards compatible features within a release series, until that series
```

reached feature complete status. The major difference between that proposal
and this one is to move the incremental feature delivery period into the
pre-release phase of development (before strict API and ABI stability

> requirements apply), rather than having it apply to the initial X.Y.Z minor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements apply), rather than applying it to the initial X.Y.Z minor
```

releases within a series.

Example Future Release Schedules
================================

Under this proposal, Python 3.9.0b1 would be released in December 2019, two
months after the Python 3.8.0 baseline feature release in October 2019.

The 3.9.0b2 release would then follow 2 months later in February 2020,
continuing through to 3.9.0b9 in April 2021.

3.9.0rc1 would be published in June 2021, 3.9.0rc2 in July 2021, and then
then the full release published as 3.9.0 in August 2021.

> The cycle would then begin over again in October 2021, with the publication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cycle would start over again in October 2021, with the publication
```

of 3.10.0b1.

> Assuming maintenance releases of 3.9.x were also to occur every other month

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming maintenance releases of 3.9.x were to occur every other month
```

Author: The "also" here refers to the beta release cadence, so I'll keep it for now.

> (but offset from the 3.10.0 beta releases), then the overall release timeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(offset from the 3.10.0 beta releases), the overall release timeline
```

would look like:

* 2019-12: 3.9.0b1
* ... beta releases every other month
* 2021-04: 3.9.0b9
* 2021-06: 3.9.0rc1 (feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc format freeze)
* 2021-07: 3.9.0rc2
* 2021-08: 3.9.0
* 2021-09: 3.9.1, 3.8.x (final 3.8.x binary maintenance release)
* 2021-10: 3.10.0b1
* 2021-11: 3.9.2
* 2021-12: 3.10.0b2
* ... beta and maintenance releases every other month
* 2022-04: 3.10.0b10
* 2022-05: 3.9.11
* 2022-06: 3.10.0rc1 (feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc format freeze)
* 2022-07: 3.10.0rc2, 3.9.12

> * 2022-08: 3.10.0

Reviewer 3: This example does not match the description above that:
> This PEP also proposes that the frequency of X.Y.0 releases be adjusted to target publishing a new release series in August of each odd-numbered year

Author: Good catch - 2022 would just contain beta and maintenance releases, so the timeline should have skipped to 2023 at that point. Fixed now.

* 2022-09: 3.10.1, 3.9.13 (final 3.9.x binary maintenance release)

(The exact schedule of maintenance releases would be up to the release team -
alternating months with the rolling beta releases is just one possibility)

> In this model, there are always two or three active maintenance branches, as in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this model, there are always two or three active maintenance branches, which is```

> the status quo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the current status quo.
```

Proposal
========

TODO (more details than the abstract, less detail than the design discussion)

Some specific points to cover (either here or in the design discussion):

- automatically appending "-unstable" to SOABI prior to rc1 to help make it
  clear that only extension modules (and wheel archives) targeting the stable
  C ABI can be reliably used across the different beta releases
- potentially consider doing the same for pyc cache files
- address the pickle forward and backward compatibility question
- consider changing documentation versionadded/changed notes to include the
  beta release version (for the benefit of beta release users)

Caveats and Limitations
=======================

Actual release dates may be adjusted up to a month earlier or later at
the discretion of the release manager, based on release team availability, and

> the timing of other events (e.g. PyCon US, or the annual core development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the timing of other events (e.g. PyCon US, or the annual core developer
```

sprints). However, part of the goal of this proposal is to provide a consistent
cadence for both contributors and end users, so adjustments ideally would be

> rare.

Reviewer: I think this last part could be split into its own sentence.

```
... contributors and end users. So ideally, adjustments would be rare. 
```

Reviewer 2: The whole sentence can probably be reworded to avoid making people work so hard to parse it:

> However, as a goal of the proposal is to provide a consistent release cadence, adjustments should be rare.

Within a release series, the exact frequency of maintenance releases would

> still be up to the release manager and the binary release team - this PEP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
still be up to the release manager and the binary release team; this PEP
```

only proposes an expected cadence for pre-releases and X.Y.0 releases.

However, for the sake of the example timelines, the PEP assumes maintenance

> releases every other month, as is being proposed for the rolling beta releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
releases every other month, which is also being proposed for the rolling beta releases.
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

For large parts of Python's user base, *availability* of new CPython feature
releases isn't the limiting factor on their adoption of those new releases.
As such, any proposal based on speeding up full feature releases needs to strike
a balance between meeting the needs of users who would be adopting each release
as it became available, and those that would now be in a position of adopting
every 2nd, 3rd, or 4th release, rather than migrating to every release (albeit
potentially with a lag of 12 months or more).

This proposal aims to approach the problem from a different angle by defining a
*new* production-ready release stream that is more specifically tailored to the
interests of operating environments that are in a position to consume new
releases as fast as the CPython core team is prepared to produce them.

Why "continuous beta" rather than "continuous alpha"?
-----------------------------------------------------

The code quality standards upheld by the CPython code review process and
BuildBot fleet make the "beta" label more suitable than the "alpha" label.

> Plus folks are more likely to actually use beta releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plus, folks are more likely to actually use the beta releases.
```

Why not use Calendar Versioning for the rolling release stream?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Steve Dower's initial write-up of this proposal [1_] suggested the use of
calendar versioning for the rolling release stream (so Python 2019.12 rather
than 3.9.0b1, etc).

Paul Moore pointed out [2_] two major practical problems with that proposal:

> * it makes it hard for users of the calendar-based versions to know where they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It makes the process difficult for users of the calendar-based versions to know where they
```

  stand in relation to the traditionally numbered versions

> * it breaks ``Python-Requires`` metadata processing (since all calendar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It breaks the ``Python-Requires`` metadata processing (since all calendar
```

  versions would appear as newer than any standard version)

This PEP aims to address both of those problems by using the established beta
version numbers for the rolling releases.

The beta numbering approach also avoids other questions raised by the calendar
versioning concept, such as how ``sys.version_info``, ``Py_VERSION_HEX``,
``site-packages`` directory naming, and installed binary naming would work.

Implications for Python library development
-------------------------------------------

By using the "beta" labelling rather than the incremental feature release
numbering proposed in PEP 598, the hope would be that consumers of these

> new rolling releases would realise that they're likely to need to build their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new rolling releases would realise that they're likely going to need to build their
```

own wheel archives from source, and will generally be more prone to encountering
library compatibility issues when updating to a new release.

> Library authors that actually want to support the beta stream would have the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Library authors who actually want to support the beta stream would have the
```

option of testing against the latest beta release in their pre-merge test
matrices (just as they test against the latest maintenance release of previously
published versions), with the CPython nightly builds offered by some CI
providers used solely in an advisory capacity for early detection of potential
compatibility problems.

Implications for the proposed Scientific Python ecosystem support period
------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Based on discussions at SciPy 2019, a NEP is currently being drafted [3_] to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on discussions at SciPy 2019, a NEP (NumPy Enhancement Proposal) is currently being drafted [3_] to
```

define a common convention across the Scientific Python ecosystem for dropping
support for older Python versions.

While the exact formulation of that policy is still being discussed, the initial

> proposal was very simple: support any Python feature release published within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proposal was very simple; support any Python feature release published within
```

the last 42 months.

For an 18 month feature release cadence, that works out to always supporting at
least the two most recent feature releases, and then dropping support for all
X.Y.z releases around 6 months after X.(Y+2).0 is released. This means there is
a 6 month period roughly every other year where the three most recent feature
releases are supported.

For a 12 month release cadence, it would work out to always supporting at
least the three most recent feature releases, and then dropping support for all

> X.Y.z releases around 6 months after X.(Y+3).0 is released. This means that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
X.Y.z releases around 6 months after X.(Y+3).0 is released. This means
```

for half of each year, the four most recent feature releases would be supported.

For a 24 month release cadence, a 42 month support cycle works out to always
supporting at least the most recent feature release, and then dropping support
for all X.Y.z feature releases around 18 months after X.(Y+1).0 is released.
This means there is a 6 month period every other year where only one feature
release is supported. If the support cycle is increased to 48 months, then

> that restores the characteristics of always support at least the two most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that restores the characteristics of always supporting at least the two most
```

PEP: 9999
Title: A rolling feature release stream for CPython
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Steve Dower <steve.dower@python.org>, Nick Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-602-annual-release-cycle-for-python/2296
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Sep-2019
Python-Version: 3.9

Abstract
========

Rather than proposing a change to CPython's release cadence (as PEP 602 does),
or a policy change to allow backwards compatible feature additions later in a
release series (as PEP 598 does), this PEP instead proposes that we amend
CPython's pre-release management process as follows:

* Feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc file format freeze, and maintenance branch
  creation all correspond with the first release candidate for an X.Y.0 release
* The X.Y.0 release candidate period is extended from 3 weeks to 2 months
* Beta releases from the master git branch would occur every other month
  whenever there is no X.Y.0 release in the release candidate phase
* Prior to the release candidate phase, all newly added interfaces are
  considered provisional, and each new release may introduce new deprecation

>   warnings (or escalate previous deprecation warnings to errors)

Reviewer 2: I think this point needs to be broken up into:
* status/deprecation/removal of anything that was in the last X.Y.0 release
* status/deprecation/removal of anything that is new since the last X.Y.0 release

Right now I can't figure out in my mind exactly what this means for our deprecation cycle. I'm sure you know exactly what you mean though (it's probably spelled out below)

Author: Next version splits this up into 4 different points (and hence may need to be edited down again)

* Routine alpha releases are removed from the process (release managers may
  still choose to publish alpha releases prior to starting the beta release

>   phase if they feel such releases are appropriate)

Reviewer 2: The parenthetical may be worth a separate point - "Release managers are responsible for scheduling as many release candidates (minimum 1) and alpha releases (no minimum) as they deem necessary"

Reviewer 2: Also, I like that the option for alpha releases exists, but I can't see where they add any value given there'll be beta releases going on.

Perhaps what we really mean is that a release manager may designate a scheduled beta release as an alpha instead, to indicate that it really is for testing purposes only? That may be handy if a significant feature lands (asyncio or PEP 432 sized) and we want to clearly mark that.

I'd suggest keeping the serial numbers sequential here though, e.g. 3.9.0b1, b2, b3, a4, b5, ...

Author: I quite like that idea - it essentially buys a 4 month cycle for a particular beta release, without skipping the intermediate release entirely.

in an era where automated continuous integration and operational monitoring
systems were still relatively immature. Since that time, many organisations
have adopted deployment models that allow them to incorporate new CPython
feature releases without adding substantially more risk than they incur for any
other code change.

In light of those changes in the wider environment, PEP 602 has proposed
reducing the feature delivery latency for the Python standard library and
CPython reference interpreter by increasing the frequency of CPython feature
releases from every 18-24 months to instead occur every 12 months.

Unfortunately, for many organisations, the cost of adopting a new Python release
doesn't automatically scale down with a reduced number of changes in the release,
as the primary costs aren't associated with resolving any discovered issues;
the primary costs are associated with the *search* for issues. This search may
involve manual testing of software systems, human review of written materials,
and other activities where the time required scales with the size of the
existing system, rather than with the number of changes between the versions of

> Python.

Reviewer 2: Before going into the comparison to other PEPs, it'd be good to mention the impact on Linux distros here, as well as third-party library developers and perhaps also CI providers.

Author: Added a paragraph about library developers that mentions CI and the version anchoring effect of the LTS Linux distros.

pre-release versions. The one change affecting full release versions is a
suggested change to their cadence.

Changes to beta release policy, phase duration, and cadence
-----------------------------------------------------------

This PEP proposes that the policy for beta releases be adjusted to be a
combination of the policies for alpha and beta releases:

* as with current beta releases, the stable BuildBot fleet is expected to be
  green prior to preparation and publication of the beta release
* as with current beta releases, the release manager is expected to review
  open release blocker issues prior to preparation and publication of the beta
  release
* as with current alpha releases, beta releases would *not* be considered
  feature complete for the next X.Y.0 release
* as with current alpha releases, all APIs added since the last CPython feature
  release would be considered provisional
* as with current alpha releases, beta releases would be prepared and published
  from the master development branch

Rather than being released monthly for a period of a few months while preparing
a new X.Y.0 release, beta releases would instead be consistently published every

> other month.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
two months.
```

"every two months" is ever so slightly more explicit than "every other month".

Author: Done

The only time this would not be the case is during the two month release
candidate period for an upcoming X.Y.0 release.

Changes to release candidate policy, phase duration, and cadence
----------------------------------------------------------------

Given the proposed changes to the beta release phase, the release candidate
phase would see the following related adjustments:

* Feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc file format freeze, and maintenance branch
  creation would all correspond with the creation of X.Y.0rc1 (currently these
  occur across a mixture of X.Y.0b1, the last beta release, and X.Y.0rc1)
* The X.Y.0 release candidate period would be extended from 3 weeks to 2 months
* There would normally be two release candidates issued a month apart, but
  additional candidates may be published at the release manager's discretion
* The final release would occur between 1 and 4 weeks after the final release
  candidate (depending if additional release candidates were needed after the

>   second)

Reviewer 2: * If the final release is delayed, the subsequent release (now slightly less than two years later) is not affected and will be scheduled for August

Author: Added a variation of this

Removal of routine alpha releases
---------------------------------

Due to the proposed policy changes for beta releases and release candidates,
CPython alpha releases would no longer serve a clear purpose, and as such
would typically be skipped.

If they chose to, release managers would still be free to make one or more
alpha releases before entering the rolling beta release period. For example,

> that would be one way of testing out new release management tooling.

Reviewer 2: See my suggestion above about the RM declaring a release as alpha rather than beta (in exceptional circumstances)

Author: Amended accordingly.

Changes to extension module loading in CPython pre-releases
-----------------------------------------------------------

Extension modules built against CPython pre-releases prior to the ABI freeze
for that release series may not actually load correctly on the final release.

Historically, adoption of alpha and beta releases has been low enough that this
hasn't really been a problem in practice. However, this PEP proposes to actively
encourage widespread operational use of beta releases, and we'd like to make it
clear that such binaries are only reliably portable to the exact version that
was used to build them (they may fail to load on even the very next alpha or
beta release).

To that end, this PEP proposes amending the extension module ``SOABI`` marker
for CPython pre-releases to use a "cpython_unstable-" prefix, and only switch
back to the regular "cpython-" prefix once the ABI for that particular version

> has been frozen on entry to the release candidate stage.

Reviewer 2: Why not a single-letter flag? Or a "b" suffix on the version (if our spec allows this...)

"Unstable" in particular carries different connotations for people, especially those who need security or legal audits of production code from people who may not be familiar with our use of the term.

Author: I've changed the working suggestion to be "cpython_prerelease" for now, but yes, that could be shortened even further and moved to appear as part of the version number.

`configure.ac` isn't set up to read from `patchlevel.h` though, and the ABI won't necessarily change on every new prerelease, so I think a single generic "this was built on a pre-release" qualifier should suffice (allowing rolling release consumers to make their own decisions on when they need to rebuild their extension modules)

Reviewer 2: As I mentioned above (below? elsewhere!), the very next part of the tag will be `cpython-3.X` where X for prereleases already does not match the latest stable release. So the only advantage of changing this would be to prevent prerelease wheels from working unmodified with the same version when it becomes a stable release.

If that's the goal (which is valid, though I disagree with it), then we should mention it. But I think the version number being different already is going to be sufficient.

(And I haven't read throughout, but I assume stable ABI users get a different tag completely?)

Author: Yep, stable ABI users already get a different tag (abi3).

The issue being tackled here is only indirectly about wheel files though: it's addressing the fact that an extension module compiled on an alpha or beta release may segfault on the final release if it used a provisional or deprecated API that was removed in a later commit.

Historically we've been able to just ignore that, but if the betas are going to start being more widely used, we want to clearly mark extension modules that were built against a not-yet-stable version of the X.Y ABI.

Author: I've updated this section to cover Windows, and to use a short "p" pre-release ABI flag on both Windows and non-Windows systems.

I've also tried to clarify that the situation this is really aiming to avoid is users of the release candidates and stable releases getting bothered by segfaults arising from extension modules that were built against a not-yet-stable ABI.

(TODO: Link to https://github.com/ncoghlan/cpython/pull/3)

> (TODO: What's the Windows equivalent of this?)

Reviewer 2: The Windows equivalent would be here:

https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/9c42f8cda552694f3b47d6388d4ae84d61731872/PCbuild/python.props#L208-L211

The debug flag goes into the main part of the filename as a `_d` suffix, which is why it's not here, and we've never had to worry about separating by other ABI flags.

The 3.9.0b2 release would then follow 2 months later in February 2020,
continuing through to 3.9.0b9 in April 2021.

3.9.0rc1 would be published in June 2021, 3.9.0rc2 in July 2021, and then
then the full release published as 3.9.0 in August 2021.

The cycle would start over again in October 2021, with the publication
of 3.10.0b1.

Assuming maintenance releases of 3.9.x were also to occur every other month
(offset from the 3.10.0 beta releases), the overall release timeline
would look like:

* 2019-12: 3.9.0b1
* ... beta releases every other month
* 2021-04: 3.9.0b9
* 2021-06: 3.9.0rc1 (feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc format freeze)
* 2021-07: 3.9.0rc2
* 2021-08: 3.9.0
* 2021-09: 3.9.1, 3.8.x (final 3.8.x binary maintenance release)
* 2021-10: 3.10.0b1
* 2021-11: 3.9.2
* 2021-12: 3.10.0b2
* ... beta and maintenance releases every other month
* 2023-04: 3.10.0b10
* 2023-05: 3.9.11
* 2023-06: 3.10.0rc1 (feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc format freeze)
* 2023-07: 3.10.0rc2, 3.9.12
* 2023-08: 3.10.0
* 2023-09: 3.10.1, 3.9.13 (final 3.9.x binary maintenance release)
* 2023-10: 3.11.0b1
* ... etc

(The exact schedule of maintenance releases would be up to the release team -

> alternating months with the rolling beta releases is just one possibility)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
alternating months with the rolling beta releases is the proposed target)
```

Author: Done

There are always two or three active maintenance branches in this model,
which preserves the status quo in that respect.

Caveats and Limitations
=======================

> Actual release dates may be adjusted up to a month earlier or later at

Reviewer 2: Let's be real: we never release early 😄 

But we should be clearer about two things here:
* which releases? Beta? Or maintenance releases? Or both?
* "dates may be adjusted" - perhaps "scheduled"? As in, announcing ahead of time that the release won't be at the usual week

the discretion of the release manager, based on release team availability, and
the timing of other events (e.g. PyCon US, or the annual core developer
sprints). However, part of the goal of this proposal is to provide a consistent
cadence for both contributors and end users, so adjustments ideally would be
rare.

Within a release series, the exact frequency of maintenance releases would
still be up to the release manager and the binary release team; this PEP
only proposes an expected cadence for pre-releases and X.Y.0 releases.

However, for the sake of the example timelines, the PEP assumes maintenance
releases every other month, as is being proposed for the rolling beta releases.

Design Discussion
=================

> Why this proposal over simply doing more frequent baseline feature releases?

Reviewer 2: Perhaps "more frequent X.Y.0 releases"? Or adding (X.Y.0) in parens? That'll make it more obvious what we're referring to here.

than 3.9.0b1, etc).

Paul Moore pointed out [2_] two major practical problems with that proposal:

* it makes it hard for users of the calendar-based versions to know where they
  stand in relation to the traditionally numbered versions
* it breaks ``Python-Requires`` metadata processing (since all calendar
  versions would appear as newer than any standard version)

This PEP aims to address both of those problems by using the established beta
version numbers for the rolling releases.

The beta numbering approach also avoids other questions raised by the calendar
versioning concept, such as how ``sys.version_info``, ``Py_VERSION_HEX``,
``site-packages`` directory naming, and installed binary naming would work.

Implications for CPython core development
-----------------------------------------

The major change for CPython core development is the need to keep the master
branch more consistently release ready.

While the main requirement for that would be to keep the stable BuildBot fleet
green, there would also be encouragement to keep the development version of
the documentation up to date for the benefit of users of the rolling beta

> releases.

Reviewer 2: We should also reach a better consensus on patterns for implementing feature detection and flags within CPython and the standard library. I don't think we have to define them all here, but it is worth acknowledging that we expect/hope to see an increase in:
* features that are deliberately detectable through conditional imports/hasattr rather than version checks
* features that are `from __future__` enabled within a beta release, that may become always-on while still in beta

Reviewer 2: The reasoning for these being that explicit detection/enabling like this makes it trivial for users of the beta release stream to notice when we remove or change provisional features (`from __future__` breaks on compile), or to safely fall back on previous functionality (we can add warnings for imports/attribute checks that we can't for version checks)

Author: Liberally lifted from these comments for a new design discussion section.

Implications for Python library development
-------------------------------------------

By using the "beta" labelling rather than the incremental feature release
numbering proposed in PEP 598, the hope would be that consumers of these
new rolling releases would realise that they're likely going to need to build
their own wheel archives from source, and will generally be more prone to
encountering library compatibility issues when updating to a new release.

Library authors who actually want to support the beta stream would have the
option of testing against the latest beta release in their pre-merge test
matrices (just as they test against the latest maintenance release of previously
published versions), with the CPython nightly builds offered by some CI
providers used solely in an advisory capacity for early detection of potential

> compatibility problems.

Reviewer 2: We can also add that official releases make it easier for CI providers to adopt our latest code (because they can trust that we've done at least basic validation) compared to build-from-master.

Author: Mentioned

This means there is a 6 month period every other year where only one feature
release is supported. If the support cycle is increased to 48 months, then
that restores the characteristics of always supporting at least the two most
recent feature releases.

Release cycle alignment for core development sprints
----------------------------------------------------

With the proposal in this PEP, it is expected that the focus of core
development sprints will shift focus slightly based on the current location
in the two year cycle.

In odd-numbered years, PyCon US would naturally focus on release candidate
preparations, while the September core development sprints would focus on
closing out any final non-security bug fixes for the release series entering
its security-fix-only phase, the initial set of post-release fixes for the just
released series, and preparing for the first beta release in the next
release series.

In even-numbered years, the focus for both events would just be on the upcoming
maintenance and beta releases. These less intense years would hopefully provide
an opportunity to tackle various process changes and infrastructure upgrades

> without impacting the release candidate preparation process.

Reviewer 2: I think you can sell these better :)

PyCon US is a great for greenfield discussions, particularly with those outside the core team. That doesn't lend itself to RC preparations at all, but for those who are not focused on RC can be thinking about big features for the next release.

Similarly, the core sprints are good for process and infrastructure (as mentioned). There'll also be a steering council election around that time every two years.

So I think we can justify this as:
* in non-release years, feature development and maintenance is good for both
* in release years, PyCon US is good for new contributors to work on bugfixes before RC and core devs to plan the next release; core sprints are good for reviewing our process

Author: Reworded more along these lines.

from Ubuntu LTS releases).

With the annual release proposal in PEP 602, both Debian and Ubuntu LTS would
consistently get a system Python version that is around 6 months old, but
would also consistently select different Python versions from each other.

With a two year cadence, and CPython releases in the latter half of the year,
they're likely to select the same version as each other, but one of them will
be choosing a CPython release that is more than 18 months behind the latest beta
releases by the time the Linux distribution ships.

If that situation does occur, and is deemed undesirable (but not sufficiently
undesirable for *Debian* to choose to adjust their release timing), then that's
where the additional complexity of the "incremental feature release" proposal
in PEP 598 may prove worthwhile.

(Moving CPython releases to the same half of the year as the Debian and Ubuntu
LTS releases would potentially help mitigate the problem, but also creates
new problems where a slip in the CPython release schedule could directly affect
the release schedule for a Linux distribution)

Implications for simple deployment environments
-----------------------------------------------

> TODO ()

Reviewer 2: May I suggest: "assuming a single person managing their own deployment"
* responsible for their own testing
* likely (or we recommend) consuming container images under CPython control
* able to choose their upgrade schedule

Author: Would you be able to take a shot at drafting these? I'm out of time for tonight, and am busy tomorrow night, so it'll be a couple of days before I get to it if we leave it up to me.

The corresponding sections that I have in PEP 598 can't be used directly, as what counts as "simple" and what counts as "complex" changes due to the fact that beta releases don't have a stable C ABI to target, but also don't have any expectations of universal forwards or backwards pickle compatibility.

Reviewer 2: Your previous section for this part is basically okay. I tweaked it a little, but I think the "no implications" message is correct. (The other section will take more effort...)

> For the purposes of this PEP, a "simple" deployment environment is any use case where it is straightforward to ensure that all target environments are updated to a new Python release at the same time (or at least in advance of the rollout of new higher level application versions), and any pre-release testing that occurs need only target a single Python micro version.
>
> The simplest such case would be scripting for personal use, where the testing and target environments are the exact same environment.
>
> Similarly simple environments would be containerised web services, where the same Python container is used in the CI pipeline as is used on deployment, and any application that bundles its own Python runtime, rather than relying on a pre-existing Python deployment on the target system.
> 
> For these use cases, this PEP should not have any significant implications - only a single micro version needs to be tested, independently of whether that version is feature complete or not.
>
> The greatest point of additional complexity are "roll-back" compatibility with independently versioned features, such as pickle and SQLite, where use of new or provisional features in the beta stream may create files that are not readable by the stable release. Applications requiring the ability to roll-back to an early CPython release would, as today, be advised to avoid adopting prerelease versions.

Author: The big part my previous text didn't cover was the consequences of "the C ABI might change without notice". So I've kept the first 3 paragraphs as you suggested, along with the last paragraph about roll-back support, but reworked the middle part to talk about extension modules.

Implications for complex deployment environments
------------------------------------------------

> TODO ()

Reviewer 2: May I suggest: "assuming an organization with a centrally managed distribution"
* predictable CPython schedule means work can be scheduled
* probably has own package builds
* may have own patches, so being closer to the CPython beta schedule may make upstream contributions easier

Reviewer 2: Also, I think the Python distros such as conda-forge, WinPython, Anaconda, etc. would fit into this category. It's probably worth reaching out to them for comment, as well as the Scientific Python section.

But perhaps we should get this first pass merged and start the discuss thread, then they can weigh in there.

Reviewer 2: Probably needs some rewording, but here's my proposed text:

> For the purposes of this PEP, "complex" deployment environments are use cases which don't meet the "simple deployment" criterion above. They may involve multiple distinct versions of Python, use of a personalised build of Python, or "gatekeepers" who are required to approve use of a new version prior to deployment.
>
> For example, organisations that install Python on their users' machines as part of a standard operating environment fall into this category, as do those that provide a standard build environment. Distributions such as conda-forge or WinPython that provide collections of consistently built and verified packages are impacted in similar ways.
>
> These organisations tend to either prefer high stability (for example, all of those who are happily using Python 2.7) or fast turnaround (for example, those who regularly contribute toward the latest prereleases). In some cases, both may exist within the same organisation for different purposes (for example, a stable Python in the build environment and the most recent update for data scientists).
>
> Under any release model, each new release of Python generates work for these organisations. This work may involve legal, security or technical reviews of Python itself, assessment and verification of impactful changes, reapplication of patches, recompilation and testing of third-party dependencies, and deployment.
>
> Organisations that can take updates quickly should be able to make use of the more frequent beta releases. Each update will require similar investigative work to today, though as each release will be more similar to the previous than under the present model, the actual work required will be reduced.
>
> For organisations with stricter evaluations or a preference for stability, the longer release cycle for stable releases will reduce the annual effort required to update, the longer release candidate period will allow more time to do internal testing before the X.Y.0 release, and the greater use by others during the beta period will provide more confidence in the initial releases. Meanwhile, the organisation can confidently upgrade through maintenance releases for a longer time without fear of breaking changes.

Reviewer: Suggestion regarding the third paragraph:

> These organisations tend to either prefer high stability (for example, all of those who are happily using Python 2.7) or fast turnaround (for example, those who regularly contribute toward the latest prereleases). In some cases, both may exist within the same organisation for different purposes (for example, a stable Python in the build environment and the most recent update for data scientists).

I think this might have too many occurrences of "for example". Also, given the imminent sunset of Python 2.7, we may want to avoid implicitly encouraging it's usage for those who prefer high stability.

Reviewer 2: I have no problem with dropping some of the repeated phrases, but mentioning Python 2.7 here is very deliberate - the stability is _absolutely_ one of the reasons some people are happier there than on Python 3, and acknowledging those users is important, as is proposing a release process that will continue to support them.

Reviewer: > mentioning Python 2.7 here is very deliberate - the stability is absolutely one of the reasons some people are happier there than on Python 3, and acknowledging those users is important

I can definitely agree that acknowledging those users is highly important, but would it be possible to do so without specifically referencing 2.7, such as "all of those who are happily using older versions"? The current version might not age especially well if someone were to read this PEP in a year or two from now, when Python 2.7 is well past the sunset and the final version was already released by Benjamin.

final release.

Why not use Calendar Versioning for the rolling release stream?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Steve Dower's initial write-up of this proposal [1_] suggested the use of
calendar versioning for the rolling release stream (so the first rolling
pre-release after Python 3.8.0 would have been Python 2019.12 rather than
3.9.0b1).

Paul Moore pointed out [2_] two major practical problems with that proposal:

* it isn't going to be clear to users of the calendar-based versions where they
  stand in relation to the traditionally numbered versions
* it breaks ``Python-Requires`` metadata processing in packaging tools with
  no clear way of fixing it reliably (since all calendar versions would appear
  as newer than any standard version)

This PEP aims to address both of those problems by using the established beta
version numbers for the rolling releases.

As an example, consider the following question: "Does Python 2021.12 include
all the new features released in Python 3.9.0?". With calendar versioning on
the rolling releases, that's impossible to answer without consulting a release

> calender to see when 3.9.0rc1 was branched off from the rolling release series.

Reviewer: Typo fix
```suggestion
calendar to see when 3.9.0rc1 was branched off from the rolling release series.
```

By constrast, the equivalent question for rolling beta releases is
straightforward to answer: "Does Python 3.10.0b2 include all the new features
released in Python 3.9.0?". Just from formulating the question, the answer is
clearly "Yes, unless they were provisional features that got removed".

The beta numbering approach also avoids other questions raised by the calendar
versioning concept, such as how ``sys.version_info``, ``PY_VERSION_HEX``,

> ``site-packages`` directory naming, and installed Python binary and extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``site-packages``, directory naming, and installed Python binary and extension
```

Author: The list entry here is genuinely "``site-packages`` directory naming", since the parent directory gets the version number in it on non-Windows systems.

Reviewer: Ah, I see. Thanks for the clarification.

mechanisms that don't rely on either ``sys.version_info`` or runtime code object
introspection.

In most cases, a simple ``hasattr`` check on the affected module will serve this
purpose, but when it doesn't, alternative approaches would be considered as part
of the feature addition. Prior art in this area includes the
``pickle.HIGHEST_PROTOCOL`` attribute, the ``hashlib.algorithms_available`` set,
and the various ``os.supports_*`` sets that the ``os`` module already offers for
platform dependent capability detection.

It would also be possible to add features that need to be explicitly enabled
via a ``__future__`` import when first included in the rolling beta releases,
even if that feature flag was subsequently enabled by default before its first
appearance in an X.Y.0 release candidate.

The rationale behind these approaches is that explicit detection/enabling like
this would make it straightforward for users of the rolling beta release stream
to notice when we remove or change provisional features
(e.g. ``from __future__`` imports break on compile if the feature flag no
longer exists), or to safely fall back on previous functionality. We can also

> choose to add warnings for imports/attribute checks that we don't have any

Reviewer: Meant to include this alongside the earlier suggestion https://github.com/ncoghlan/peps/pull/4#discussion_r329298257.
```suggestion
choose to add warnings for imports/attribute checks where we don't have any
```

Author: Reworded the paragraph.

> practical way to add for version checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
practical way to account for version checks.
```

Implications for CPython core development
-----------------------------------------

The major change for CPython core development is the need to keep the master
branch more consistently release ready.

While the main requirement for that would be to keep the stable BuildBot fleet
green, there would also be encouragement to keep the development version of
the documentation up to date for the benefit of users of the rolling beta
releases.

On the specific topic of the stable ABI, the "all ones" ``PY_VERSION_HEX``
value could potentially be reserved as a ``Py_LIMITED_API_PROVISIONAL`` marker

> to allow for testing of potential stable ABI additions without immediately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to allow for the testing of potentially stable ABI additions without immediately
```

noting as a potential future addition in the event that a stable ABI enhancement
is needed to serve a particular purpose, and publishing an alpha release isn't
considered an adequate option for obtaining design feedback.

Implications for Python library development
-------------------------------------------

By using the "beta" labelling rather than the incremental feature release
numbering proposed in PEP 598, the hope would be that consumers of these
new rolling releases would realise that they're likely going to need to build
their own wheel archives from source, and will generally be more prone to
encountering library compatibility issues when updating to a new release.

Library authors who actually want to support the beta stream would have the
option of testing against the latest beta release in their pre-merge test
matrices (just as they test against the latest maintenance release of previously
published versions), with the CPython nightly builds offered by some CI
providers used solely in an advisory capacity for early detection of potential
compatibility problems.

Having a rolling beta release stream available may also make it more feasible

> for more CI providers to offer a "CPython beta release" testing option than are

Reviewer: Not 100% sure about this one, the present phrasing of this paragraph seemed slightly confusing to me. 
```suggestion
for more CI providers to offer a "CPython beta release" testing option that are
```

Author: Reworded, and added a reference to the Travis CI CPython nightly build docs as an example.

development sprints would shift slightly based on the current location
in the two year cycle.

In release years, the timing of PyCon US is suitable for new contributors to
work on bug fixes and smaller features before the first release candidate goes
out, while the Language Summit and core developer discussions can focus on
plans for the next release series.

The post-release core development sprint in release years will provide an
opportunity to incorporate feedback received on the release, either as part of
the next maintenance release (for bug fixes and feedback on provisional APIs),
or as part of the next release series. These sprints would also likely
correspond with the Steering Council elections for the next release cycle.

In non-release years, the focus for both events would just be on the upcoming
maintenance and beta releases. These less intense years would hopefully provide
an opportunity to tackle various process changes and infrastructure upgrades
without impacting the release candidate preparation process.

Release cycle alignment for prominent Linux distributions
---------------------------------------------------------

> Some rolling release Linux distributions (e.g. Arch, Gentoo) may be in a

Reviewer: (Not a suggestion, just commentary)

As a present Arch user, I am hoping that they would adopt the proposed rolling release Python model. This would be great for obtaining the latest features.

like Debian, RHEL/CentOS, or Ubuntu LTS as their preferred Python environment)
or fast turnaround (for example, those who regularly contribute toward the
latest CPython pre-releases).

In some cases, both usage models may exist within the same organisation for
different purposes, such as:

* using a stable Python environment for mission critical systems, but allowing
  data scientists to use the latest available version for ad hoc data anaylsis
* a hardware manufacturer deploying a stable Python version as part of their
  production firmware, but using the latest available version in the development
  and execution of their automated integration tests

Under any release model, each new release of Python generates work for these
organisations. This work may involve legal, security or technical reviews of
Python itself, assessment and verification of impactful changes, reapplication
of patches, recompilation and testing of third-party dependencies, and
only then deployment.

Organisations that can take updates quickly should be able to make use of the
more frequent beta releases. Each update will require similar investigative work

> to today, though as each release will be more similar to the previous than under

Reviewer: I find this to be a bit more readable, but this might be a subjective suggestion.
```suggestion
to today. However, since each release will be more similar to the previous than under
```
